Jaiden Reddy
Professor Ludvik
OSPKYOTO 42
29 May 2023

Ponds in the Gardens of Japan

In the vast gardens of Heian Jingu shrine lies a pond as large as most temple gardens, bridged by a covered wooden structure complete with intricate Japanese-style joinery. On a rainy Monday afternoon, groups of salarymen each seventy years or older gather to eat lunch, young couples quietly snicker over discussions of anime, and tourists tramp by with loud shoes and louder voices. The pond and its surrounding streams, replete with lotuses, koi, water lilies, and turtles, create a lively element in the serene environment. The variety of functions served by ponds in Japanese gardens does not vary only in such a literal sense, however. Their position as a quiet nexus of activity, even in modern times, highlights the complexity of their form and function. They may serve as powerful religious symbols, manifesting the otherworldly on this Earth; they may act as complements of carefully chosen stones, flow carved into an artificial path or subtly guided towards a natural one, the difference determined simply by the slight mathematics of an angle; they may play as an instrument, the sound of raindrops gathering into a falling stream which sounds like piano notes, ringing under gathering clouds. If gardens truly are “spaces of aesthetic and spiritual contemplation”, then perhaps ponds escape quick characterization by design. Regardless, their complex unification of both the surrounding greenery and the open environment above makes ponds a fantastically beautiful garden element.
The poetic quality of ponds in Japanese gardens lies in their ability to emblematize phenomena which just escape scientific description but evoke undeniable emotion. In his book The Art of Setting Stones, Peter Keane links the liquidity of time to the cyclicality of blooming and wilting in a garden. He writes: “Time, too, is liquid. It flows like a brook… as there are places where water surges forward, slipping fast and smooth… so too is there a kind of time that hurries along, passes all too quickly, and is gone” (Keane 22). While Keane finds inspiration in the brook, the currents of a pond provide an even deeper exploration of these ideas. When connected to a stream, a pond can feature intricate patterns of movement, currents absorbing and crossing one another, driven by opaque fluid dynamics as magical as they are scientific. Such highly observable but wholly unpredictable phenomena contrast strongly with standard, small garden streams, where a well-chosen rock can enable complete human-originated redirection. In this sense ponds connect the observed and the unexplainable, serving as an ideal representation for the contemplative poetry which was the goal of Heian-period aristocrats. Meanwhile, associated elements such as bridges and rocks selected for their flat surface allow varied views from which to easily consider these flowing currents, strengthening the pond’s function as a source for spiritual searching.
Ponds may also provide religious significance, their maintenance and design symbolizing both Shinto and Buddhist values. At Byodoin temple, the large, almost unbounded pond reflects the grand halls in a display of religious and political power. In contrast to those ponds where trees encroach upon or conceal the shores, the pond in Byodoin invokes a sense of alien landing, a religious placement from above. Relative to other garden elements, the pond is allowed more space at the edges, providing a more complete view of the temple. In their textbook The Art of the Japanese Garden, David and Michiko Young explain that Byodoin was meant “to recreate the Western Paradise of Amida Buddha” (Young 90). The reflection of the Phoenix Hall on the pond surface emphasizes this status, further aggrandizing the religious scene. Meanwhile, at Heian Jingu Garden, the flow from the pond is maintained and filtered by long poles which catch debris floating down the stream in a scene vaguely reminiscent of Shinto purification. Buddhist symbolism abounds as well, despite the Shinto nature of the shrine: water lilies and lotuses force themselves out of the muddy riverbed, twisted, barely visible roots rising through the translucent darkness to offer an unparalleled blossom to the strolling viewer. 
The pond may be the element of the garden most able to embrace imperfection—it is the most natural, the most dynamic, the most unmanageable, shattered leaves pooling on the pond’s surface as decorations on the margins are eroded by the water. This lack of control makes ponds a difficult element for garden maintenance. The meeting of water and rock is one of the more obvious examples of the geomantic principles Keane discusses in Japanese Garden Design when he explains “Yang (the positive, active force) and Yin (the negative, passive force)” (Keane 65). The pseudo-waves created by the lapping water perfectly embody Yang, while rock beaches provide the negative passivity of Yin. However, the Sakuteiki reminds us of the many challenges associated with gardening by the water, arguing that “rocky shores are interesting to look at, but, since they eventually fall into desolation, they should not be used as models for gardening” (Sakuteiki 189). The reader is reminded that there exists a challenge posed by both maintenance and contemplation of ponds to not simply ignore but to fully appreciate the spiritual value in the imperfections. Beyond this, the shape of the pond garden is a crucial element to both its placement and interpretation. At a pond in the gardens of Taizo-in, the selected shape of a gourd serves as an oblique answer to a Buddhist koan, which is meant to communicate a fundamental religious truth through the physical shape of a garden. In this way the shape of the pond can convey purpose in a manner similar to its relationship with nature.





















Works Cited
Keane, Marc P. The Art of Setting Stones & Other Writings from the Japanese Garden. Stone Bridge Press, 2002. 
Young, David, and Michiko Young. The Art of the Japanese Garden: History Culture Design. Chāruzuītatorushuppan, 2019. 
Keane, Marc Peter. Japanese Garden Design. Tuttle Publishing, 2017. 
Takei, Jirō, and Marc P. Keane. Sakuteiki: Visions of the Japanese Garden: A Modern Translation of Japan’s Gardening Classic. Tuttle, 2008. 
